Welcome back.
In our last video, we started
walking through a case study of how
one company applied a multidimensional and
analytical approach to decide on
a strategy for acquiring new customers.
When we left of, the team had
determined the analytic outputs,
constructed an analytic design and
verified that all the data needed for
the analysis was available.
In this video, we'll dig in deeper and
see how the analysis was actually done.
As a reminder,
here's the high level process.
A Customer Segmentation effort and
Geographic Segmentation effort would
jointly guide internal and
external analysis streams.
Those strings would come together to
characterize a set of strategic options
that would be compared and acted upon.
Let's look at each step, starting with
the Customer Segmentation effort.
As we mentioned in the last video,
a key consideration in the analysis
was the ability to link
segments in the current customer base
to identifiable segments in the market.
It would certainly be possible to
construct customer segments with internal
data using clustering analysis or
other methods and
the company had actually
done that already.
However, it turns out that it's really
difficult to use this kind of segmentation
externally with any degree of precision.
The reason is, that the internal models
built using all sorts of information we
have on current customers that we
don't have on potential customers.
So, we often can't segment
the customer until after we have them.
This is useful for a lot of things, but
not necessarily for customer acquisition.
A number of third party companies had
developed products that help with
this problem.
Companies like Claritas, Acxiom,
Experian and others have developed off
the shelf segmentation schemas that try to
capture key drivers of consumer behavior.
Some are driven more by demographics,
others more by psychographics or
technographics.
Typically, these schemas break
all possible customers into 50 or
60 different segments, and most of them
can be matched directly to customers in
the market, making them highly actionable.
The way we make the linkage between our
current customers and those third party
schemas is usually by having the third
party company score our customer base.
We won't get the details
of how this is done.
But ultimately,
we send the company a list of customers
with some basic information and they send
the list back with the appropriate
segment attached each customer.
We then load this information
back into our database.
In this case, the company didn't
know which schema would work best.
So, the first step was to assess four or
five the available schemas to see
which produced the best results.
Of course, that begs the question
as to what best means?.
Remember that in segmentation, we seek to
maximize homogeneity within segments and
heterogeneity between segments.
In other words, we want members of
a segment to look like each other but
look different than other segments.
It turns out that the mechanics of the
assessment were fairly straightforward.
A sample Customer List was
sent to each provider and
returned with segments attached.
The team then looked at a variety
of key metrics by segment.
Average revenue, historical cancel rate,
usage behaviors, and a few other metric.
Calculating the mean and
variance around each one, as well as
the variance across the segment means.
Using this information, it was fairly
clear that one schema in particular did
a much better job of establishing segments
that had lower internal variance and
larger variance across the means for
just about all relevant metrics.
This segmentation schema was chosen as
the move forward option in the analysis.
The second step in the analysis
was to find the right way to
group geographic markets.
In general, large scale acquisition
efforts incorporate mass advertising to
support more tactical programs and
product offerings.
There are limits to how finely mass
media efforts can be targeted.
For example, we could create confusion if
we try to push one message to one town and
a completely different message
to the next town over.
These efforts can also be expensive and
there are clear economies of scale
to having uniformity across markets.
So the idea here was, to find the simplest
way that markets could be arranged to
reflect differences in the types
of customers in those markets.
The team thought about using
a clustering algorithm,
like k-means clustering to group markets.
However, they were concerned about
how those clusters would map
back to the company's organization and
market communication structures.
This is where the art and
science of data analytics come together.
The team decided to try to take more of a
heuristic approach that would account for
the company's regional structure and the
way it was currently looking at markets.
Here's the actual artifact that
the team used to describe the approach.
We won't walk through this in detail, but
the team made a qualitative determination
as to how many geographic
segments would be actionable.
Then, examined the few different ways
of grouping markets using a more
quantitative assessment.
Similar to the way the customer
segmentation schemas were examined,
the team looked to combine geographies
that were similar to each other and
land on a manageable number of groups
that were different from each other.
In this case, what they looked
at was the concentration of
customer segments present at each level of
the geographic hierarchy and the number of
segments required to account for 50%
of the population in a geographic area.
The smaller the number,
the more uniform the area.
Ultimately, the team determined that only
three segments were required to capture
significant differences
in market composition and
that these segments could be
based on population density.
Namely, major markets with more than one
million people, urban markets with more
than 100,000 people, and rural
markets with less than 100,000 people.
Here's how the relationship between
those geographic segments and
the most common customer segments was
illustrated in the later presentation.
With customer segments and
geographic segments defined,
the team was ready to move to
the next phase of the analysis.
Establishing customer value by
segment using internal data.
The approach the team took to get
to the value by segment was more or
less driven by a classic customer
lifetime value calculation.
You may recall we presented a really
simple version of of a customer lifetime
value equation in an earlier video.
Again, this equation basically just
looks at customer level revenues and
cost over time and expresses them to
in today's dollars by accounting for
the time value of money.
Now ideally, we'd be able to get
a complete accounting of all revenues and
cost that could be applied to a customer.
In reality, it tends to be pretty easy
to get revenue, but harder to get cost.
In this case, the team was able to get
good revenue information from the billing
system, but limited the cost
side of the calculation to
things that might differ
significantly across customers.
These included Direct Acquisition Costs,
Activity and Usage-Based Costs and
Uses of Services like Customer Care.
However, the most important part of
the customer lifetime value equation is
lifetime, or n in our version.
The team used two methods
to calculate lifetime.
The first was, a simple Historical
Analysis of customers by segment,
which looked at the lifetime of customers
who had canceled over the past two years.
The second was,
using a Predictive Model that estimated
the lifetime of current customers.
In another case of art and
science coming together, the team blended
the two methods to establish a measure of
lifetime they thought would better reflect
both existing and prospective customers.
From there,
the mechanics were pretty straightforward.
Each customer was assigned a customer
segment and geographic segment.
And expected lifetime value was
calculated for each customer and
aggregated into the average
expected lifetime value for
each combined customer
by geographic segment.
A few other summary metrics
were also computed for
each combined segment, namely the number
of customers and average revenue.
All of this work was done in an analytical
database environment primarily
using SQL coding
In terms of customer lifetime value,
there's one other small
detail worth discussing.
Since only a subset of cost items
were used in the calculation,
the absolute value of that
metric was not very meaningful.
For example,
just because a value was positive did
not mean a customer's profitable.
To avoid confusion, the team normalized
the lifetime value measure into something
they called a Relative Desirability
Measure where positive number showed above
average profitability and negative number
showed below average profitability.
These measures would help the team
characterize four of the seven
scenarios that were requested
from the leadership team.
Namely, maximizing the customer base,
maximizing total revenue,
maximizing revenue per customer and
maximizing customer profitability.
However, there were three other scenarios
that the team needed to consider as well.
Focusing on teens, tweens and young
adults, focusing on minority groups, and
focusing on families.
To construct similar measures,
the team used additional information
from the customer segmentation schema.
Each segment had information
about its demographic makeup,
namely the percentage of
the segment made up by each group.
Age, minority and family segment metrics
were constructed by using simple weighted
averages like the following, which
calculates average lifetime value for
the Young Adults segment.
This was repeated for
each metric across each type of segment.
Now, the team had the performance
metrics they needed for all segments and
scenarios, but they also need to decide
the acquisition opportunities and
did this using external market data.
Broadly speaking,
the overall process of analyzing
external data involve a lot of
qualitative and semi-quantitative work.
As we've mentioned in the last video,
there were different views within
the organization on what strategies
the company should take.
Each of these constituent groups
needed to be attended to.
So, a lot of formative material was
produced to validate assumptions and
explore the nuances of each
scenario relative to the market.
We won't go into all that detail here.
Suffice to say, there were a number
of small ad hoc analyses and
renderings of external data
that contributed to the work.
What we will do is,
walk through the critical analysis that
fed directly into the option summaries.
The critical data used in the external
market analysis was obtained through
a tool provided by the customer
segmentation provider.
This data provided population volumes for
each segment in each market.
It also provided the degree to
which each segment was penetrated
with the type of technology or
company provided.
As well as the likelihood of each segment
to adapt that technology in the near term.
There are a few ways in
which this data was used.
One of them was to construct what the team
called a penetration likelihood map,
which looked at the Market Penetration of
segments versus the company's existing
Market Share.
The basic structure and interpretation
of the map looks something like this.
As an example,
if the company's market share was high and
the penetration was low,
it basically meant that the company
already had most of a lagging segment,
and the acquisition opportunity was low.
Conversely, if the market
share was low but
the penetration was high, there was
an opportunity for acquisition, but
would have to be done by stealing
customers from competitors.
These customers were known as Switchers.
This mapping helped assess
the overall size and
relative probability of acquiring
customers in each segment.
Additional market information about the
relative growth rates in age groups and
minority populations was
incorporated as well
to project the relative growth of
each customer segment in the future.
Mechanically, this was more or
less the opposite of what was done with
the weighted average in
the internal data analysis.
So, the size of a customer segment in a
feature period t, was internally weighted
by the growth rate of each group
within the segment at period t,
relative to the current size of
the group at the time of the analysis.
A combination of hard market data and
strategic assumptions were used to
assemble the external information needed
to bring the overall
analysis back together.
Namely, the populations of each segment in
each market and a set of probabilities of
acquiring those segments based on
the segment market share, penetration and
intention characteristics.
Basically, this told the team how
many customers in each segment
the company could reasonably
plan to get under each scenario.
In our next video,
we'll see how internal and
external analysis were brought together,
summarized and presented.